# NHL_R_Code

The National Hockey League (NHL) is a professional ice hockey league based out of North America. The league was established back in 1917 with only 4 teams, all of which were Canadian. As the sport gained popularity and new markets were established the total number of teams in the league grew. As of today, the NHL is composed of 32 teams; 7 of which are Canadian and 25 are American. 

A typical NHL season is made up of the preseason or exhibition, the regular season and the playoffs or more commonly known as the “Stanley Cup Playoffs”. For our project we focused our analysis on the regular season data. This was done for a variety of reasons; the data set for the regular season consisted of 82 games, whereas the pre-season typically only includes 6-8 games. The pre-season would most likely not have enough data points to derive a model with any sort of significance. The pre-season has also historically been used by teams as an opportunity to “field” or trial players typically not on the team to see how they would perform, therefore these data points would not be representative of the team performance during the regular season. The playoff data was omitted in our analysis as only the top 16 performing teams during the regular season will qualify for the playoffs.

The project objective was to analyze a number of the team statistics for a single season of data and 32 NHL teams, in order to derive the best possible model with respect to a teams performance for the NHL regular season. In deriving this model we investigated and confirmed that the modeled data satisfied the 4 assumption requirements of linear regression (linearity, homoscedasticity, normality and independence). If the model failed to meet any of these assumptions the appropriate test statistics to best analyze and interpret the data would be used to justify any required transformations.

The metrics used to evaluate which model best predicts the dependent variable (points accumulated during the 2018 season) would primarily depend on the adjusted R-squared and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE). It was expected that investigation would include independent variables determined to be the “best predictors” (highest significance) with respect to team success as measured by points. We will also investigate and determine interaction and higher order relationships between significant predictors.

The final model will then be validated by using previous regular season statistics in order to compare the expected team performance to the actual team performance. Lastly we will use our model in order to predict the expected team performance of the ongoing 2021/22 NHL season.

The subject matter experts in our group felt that the most significant independent variables for analysis would be the following; GF/GP, GA/GP, Shots/GP, S%, GF 5v5, GA 5v5 and Win % 1 Goal Game. Since teams earn points by winning hockey games, that is to say teams win games by scoring more goals then their opponent, one would expect a team with a higher mean GF/GP (goals for or goals “scored” per game played) and a lower mean GA/GP (goals against or goals scored by opponents per game played) will have significant influence on a teams performance. The Shots/GP dependent variable represents the mean number of shots a team accumulates in a single game. Since the opportunities to score goals comes directly from “shooting” one would also expect a team with a higher mean Shots/GP to have an influence on a teams performance, though just because a team has many shots does not necessarily translate into goals or performance. S% represents the number of goals scored divided by total shots taken. This variable should be more indicative of team success as it reflects a teams ability to convert opportunities to score into goals. A team with a higher S% can generally be expected to score more goals and win more games. The GF 5v5 and GA 5v5 variables represent a team's ability to score goals and have goals scored against them when playing at “even strength” that is 5 players vs 5 opposing players. Since the majority of a hockey game is played “even strength” one would also expect these variables to have a significant influence. A team that can score more goals and have less goals scored against them while playing at “even strength” is expected to perform better than a team which does not. Lastly Win % 1 Goal Game is expected to be included in the final model as the National Hockey League is a professional hockey league that is extremely competitive, a large percentage of game outcomes are decided by 1 goals. A team that has a higher win percentage in these competitive games is expected to perform better than a team that can not.
